In India, food would be first offered to the oldest person in the family, in this case groom’s grandfather.

One of the ladies offered him the food, to which he politely declined saying that he was waiting for Rukma.

Rukma was Groom’s grandmother; she was sleeping all this while. Apparently she was not very well.

I was pressing him really hard to eat when one of the guys from the group pulled me aside and explained. He said,” In their 70 years of marriage, they never ate without each other” ”For everyone back home they serve as an example of truest love” he added.

Now I was very curious. I was staring at him, he was visibly very hungry. But he chose not to show it.

I knew it was not my place, but out of curiosity I asked him, “So baba (grandsire) what is it that keeps your love alive for each other”

He was visibly curious and a little agitated; perhaps this was a frequent question for him.

He took a deep breath, looked at me and said, “Beta (son) there is only one secret to the long lasting love” “You must always VALUE your partner” he added.

This isn’t exactly a magic spell I wondered.

__He continued, “When you Value your partner you strive to keep her with you. In order for that to happen you start caring for her; you start respecting her; you treat her as a valuable asset; you make conscious efforts to make her happy. When you do all this, you get all of this in return.”__

So you Value her every single day of your life and everything else would follow up and everything would fall in its place.

So what was your original question? He asked

I had a moment of profoundness.
