In the USA today, legally and socially it still makes a big difference to be married. While couples who don't marry do not face the same level of discrimination that they did 20-50 years ago, domestic partners are simply not recognized the same as married couples. 

I know a couple who lived together as domestic partners for more than 10 years. They lived like a married couple but never happened to take the step of getting married. One day the woman had a stroke. She was rushed off to the ICU and had to have emergency brain surgery to save her life. Her partner arrived explained that she had no family in this country and was not in communication with any family in the country of her birth. They eventually allowed him to authorize her surgery since there was no other option but this delayed her receiving critical medical care for many hours.  The stroke caused her permanent damage to her ability to talk, understand, walk, eat and care for herself. He was forced to go to court to have a conservatorship put in place which means the he declared to the court and proved that she is incapable of caring for herself. It was granted and he now has the legal ability to make any life decisions for her, financial, medical, legal. 

He told me that even though he had a court order to make all decisions for her he found it incredibly difficult for him to do so. Banks, social service programs, and some medical facilities would not accept that paperwork as valid. He told me if he pushed back hard they would cooperate eventually but there was definitely an air of suspicion about him. It made a challenging situation much harder. After a few years they decided to get married. This was primarily so that he could put her on his health insurance. Since they got married he has been shocked at how easy it is to deal with her financial, legal and healthcare matters. He told me all he has to say is "I'm her husband" and suddenly the resistance disappears. 

When my late husband was sick I found it incredibly easy to get information about him form his healthcare providers, deal with financial institutions and other matters. Occasionally (usually with medical billing issues) they would want to have his permission to speak with me. Most of the time all I had to do was say "I'm his wife" and I had no problems with anything. 

Our society values and assumes that married couples have implied rights to information and access to legal, financial and medical information that non-married couples do not.
