I was in a similar position once. I was with a girl for almost six years, and she was great and really loved me, but I always felt like we were on a different page. We would break up every few months, but always get back together, mostly because I didn't want to hurt her and because she always said she didn't know what to do without me. We lived together and I paid most of the rent, so if we split up she would likely have to move somewhere much cheaper in a different city, far from her friends and community. The guilt of making her do that was too much for me. When she started saying she wanted to get married, I thought, “Well maybe this is it. Maybe this is the best it will ever be and I should just do it.”

Then I met someone else, and immediately felt a spark I'd never felt with my girlfriend. I realized all the excuses I'd made about my relationship weren't really about me wanting to protect my girlfriend, but were about me being afraid I wouldn't find anything better. Not wanting to be the bad guy was going to trap her in a relationship with someone who would never really be happy with her.

I broke up with my girlfriend the next day. She was devastated. She moved to a new city in a different state, far from her friends and community. And you know what? She turned out fine. She made new friends. She started a new career. She didn't need me to be happy. She can now find someone who really wants to be with her.

I ended up marrying that other girl I met, and am still as madly in love with her as I was when we first started dating. Don't marry someone because you feel obligated to or because you don't want to hurt them. It's not fair to you or to them. Let them find someone who really loves them, and go out and find someone you really love too.

This makes it sound easy, but in the short term it might not be. Being the bad guy sucks. In the long term though, you'll probably both be happier. 
