# What are the things we must know before getting married?

Prenuptial Agreement - Some people are afraid of discussing this but it must be addressed! Know beforehand whether one of these agreements are for you. You and your spouse should be on the same page on this before you get married. You don’t want to bring something like this to the table after the fact.

Who You Are - I’m still in my early twenties and I’ve noticed that I seem to change drastically with each passing year. My 30 year old cousin told me that the person I am at age 20 will be a completely different person at age 25 and a completely different person at age 30. Sometimes it’s difficult for couples who marry young because as they age together they grow apart and become different people.

Your Life’s Goals - You should have a rough idea of what you are striving for in life. It isn’t a good idea to bring someone into your life when you don’t know what you are doing with yours yet!

What You Are Looking For - Before getting married you should know exactly what you are looking for in someone you want to spend your life with. What traits do you desire in your potential spouse? What traits do you refuse accept in your potential spouse?

Children - You should know if having kids is in the plan for you and your partner. It would be a shame if you get married and both of you are on opposite ends of the spectrum on this issue!

Living Situation - Sort out your living situation. Where will the two of you live and under what circumstances? Sometimes couples break up because they can’t decide on what city they should live in, especially if they are both from different ones.

FINANCES! - This is huge. We need to remember that marriage is not simply about love. Marriage is partially a business transaction as well. You need to know how the two of you will manage your finances together. Plenty of marriages end not because of love but because of financial instability.

Your Spouse’s Family - When you get married you are not only marrying your partner in crime, but you are marrying their family as well. If you despise your spouse’s family, don’t think that you can get married and find ways to avoid her side of the family.

Trust - How well do you trust your spouse? Like seriously. If you find yourself constantly invading their privacy (checking emails, text messages, etc.) when they aren’t looking you aren’t ready to marry them. Relationships are built on trust and without it it it will inevitable crumble.

Do You Love Them? - Stop and really ask yourself if you love the person you are considering getting married to. Do you love them or do you love the idea of them? Loving someone is a choice you make each and every day. If this isn’t something you are willing to do for the rest of your life for someone then marrying that person isn’t the right choice.

You must share similar values with her at least 80% of the time. If she values materialism and you value minimalism, both of you simply can’t live together. You can’t even buy groceries together. Remember, married couples live as a team.

You must learn to embrace her bad habits, if they aren’t critical. If you don’t accept the habits by heart and merely tolerate with her, you’ll inevitably explode one day. Be considerate and accept human flaws.

You must communicate your needs with each other. In true love, giving is more important than receiving. If you think about receiving more than giving, you aren’t fully prepared for a marriage.

You must handle finances together. Make transparent financial records and important decisions together. If you don’t have full confidence to do this, think twice about your marriage. Maybe you’re still unprepared, or the woman isn’t the suitable one.

You must understand her worries and fears. Everyone has them, including the woman you consider marrying. Understand the reason behind her insecurities and make her feel safe all the time. If the woman truly loves you, she’ll do the same for you too.

You must establish a consensus about family planning with her. “When to have kids? How many kids? How many years should they be apart? Do both of you even want kids?” If you want to marry a woman, these questions must be communicated honestly. Doing it early shows that you are a responsible and practical man.

You must have respect her as your future wife and as a person. Yes, she will be your wife, but at the same time she’s also her parents’ daughter and her friends’ friend. She’s a person like you too. Understand her point of view, especially when she deals with her social circles.

You must respect and appreciate her family. Understand that the woman would not exist without her existing family. Appreciate her family from the bottom of your heart. Also, respect her family and show them you’re the right person to take care of her.

You must establish clear household rules with her. “Who mops the floor? Who wash the dishes? Who dries the clothes?” The devil is in the details. Using the rules as a basis can greatly simplify your daily lives. And sure, you can cover each other whenever necessary.

You must live and work towards the same goal with her, such as achieving financial freedom, building the family you want, or exploring 99 countries in the world. After all, marriage is about sharing living your lives together.



















