I don't think junior engineers should be involed in hiring process. They lack the experience and knowledge to judge whether an engineer is good or not, not to mention distinguish "great" and "good". Walter Isaacson quotes Jobs as saying, “I’ve learned over the years that, when you have really good people, you don’t have to baby them. By expecting them to do great things, you can get them to do great things. The original Mac team taught me that A-plus players like to work together, and they don’t like it if you tolerate B-grade work.”

Take a minute and look at the people around you. Are they A-players? Or are they B and C-players? A-players are motivated, engaged and creative. They are performance-driven and have high expectations for themselves and for others. B and C-players, on the other hand, often do just enough to get by and to be paid for it. The question now becomes – how do you find and hire A-players?

The hiring process is difficult and very time-consuming. And it can lead to disappointment if it’s not managed right. As a manager with a busy schedule you may also be thinking that you just don’t have the time to invest in a lengthy recruitment process. Once again Steve Jobs puts things into perspective.

"Assume you’re by yourself in a start-up and you want a partner. You’d take a lot of time finding the partner, right? He would be half of your company. Why should you take any less time finding a third of your company or a fourth of your company or a fifth of your company? When you’re in a start-up, the first ten people will determine whether the company succeeds or not. Each is 10% of the company. So why wouldn’t you take as much time as necessary to find all the A-players? If three were not so great, why would you want a company where 30% of your people are not so great? A small company depends on great people much more than a big company does."

What I like about this excerpt from Steve Jobs is that it shows you just how passionate he was about hiring the best people. And he took it seriously – it wasn’t something to be rushed.

But he also gives sound reasoning. I don’t think anyone could argue the fact that spending time hiring good people is the best investment of your time.

Every company should be extremely serious about hiring people, because it is eventually people that make impact on company. And we should avoid using third-party headhunter to recruit people. Every company has its unique culture, headhunters aren't familier with your culture and most of them don't know how to access candidates' skill, experience and personality. Interviwer should be a person who is familier with company culture and know exactly what kind of people this job is looking for and should have enough experience to judge a candidate's experience and personality. 
