### From Ladder to Treadmill

In 1858, the year Charles Darwin and Alfred Wallace published the first plausible account of a mechanism for evolution, the Victorian brand of optimism known as ‘progress’ was in its prime. It is hardly surprising that Darwin and Wallace were immediately interpreted as having given succour to the god of progress. Evolution’s immediate popularity (and it was popular) owed much to the fact that it was misunderstood as a theory of steady progress from amoeba to man, a ladder of self-improvement.

As the end of the second millennium approaches mankind is in a different mood. Progress, he thinks, is about to hit the buffers of overpopulation, the greenhouse effect and the exhaustion of resources. However fast we run, we never seem to get anywhere. Has the industrial revolution made the average inhabitant of the world healthier, wealthier and wiser? Uncannily (or, as a philosopher would have us believe, predictably) evolutionary science is ready to suit the mood. The fashion in evolutionary science is now to scoff at progress; evolution is a treadmill, not a ladder.

### Pregnant Virgins

For people, sex is the only way to have babies and that, plainly enough, is its purpose. It was only in the last half of the nineteenth century that anybody saw a problem with this. The problem was that there seemed to be all sorts of better ways of reproducing. Microscopic animals split in two. Willow trees grow from cuttings. Dandelions produce seeds that are clones of themselves. Virgin greenfly give birth to virgin young that are already pregnant with other virgins. August Weismann saw this clearly in 1889. ‘The significance of amphimixis [sex],’ he wrote, ‘cannot be that of making multiplication possible, for multiplication may be effected without amphimixis in the most diverse ways – by division of the organism into two or more, by budding, and even by the production of unicellular germs.

### Of Sex and Free Trade

A brief genetic glossary is necessary before we proceed. Genes are biochemical recipes written in an alphabet of four letters called DNA, recipes for how to make and run a body. A normal human being has two copies of each of 75,000 genes in every cell in his or her body. The total complement of 150,000 human genes is called the genome and the genes live on 23 pairs of ribbon-like objects called chromosomes. When a man impregnates a woman, each one of his sperm contains one copy of each gene, 75,000 in all, on 23 chromosomes. These are added to the 75,000 single genes on 23 chromosomes in the woman’s egg to make a complete human embryo with 75,000 pairs of genes and 23 pairs of chromosomes.

One more technical term is essential: meiosis, which is simply the procedure by which the male selects the genes that will go into a sperm, or the female selects the genes that will go into an egg. The man may choose either the 75,000 genes he inherited from his father, or the 75,000 he inherited from his mother, or, more likely, a mixture. During meiosis something peculiar happens. Each of the 23 pairs of chromosomes is laid alongside its opposite number. Chunks of one set are swapped with chunks of the other in a procedure called __recombination__. One whole set is then passed on to the offspring to be married with a set from the other parent: a procedure known as __outcrossing__.

Sex is recombination plus outcrossing: this mixing of genes is its principal feature. The consequence is that the baby gets a thorough mixture of his four grandparents’ genes (because of recombination) via his two parents (because of outcrossing). Between them, recombination and outcrossing are the essential procedures of sex. Everything else about it – gender, mate choice, incest avoidance, polygamy, love, jealousy – are all ways of doing outcrossing and recombination more effectively or carefully.

None the less, Weismann’s followers, and especially Sir Ronald Fisher and Hermann Müller, could escape the teleology trap by arguing that evolution, if not preordained, was at least essential. Asexual species were at a disadvantage and would fail in competition with sexual species. By incorporating the concept of the gene into Weismann’s argument, Fisher’s book in 19308 and Muller’s in 19329 laid out a seemingly watertight argument for the advantages of sex, and Müller even went so far as to declare the problem emphatically solved by the new science of genetics. Sexual species shared their newly invented genes among all individuals, asexual ones did not. So sexual species were like groups of inventors pooling their resources. If one man invented a steam engine and another a railway, then the two could come together. Asexual ones behaved like groups of jealous inventors who never shared their knowledge, so that steam locomotives were used on roads and horses dragged carts along railways.

In 1965, James Crow and Motoo Kimura modernized the Fisher–Müller logic by demonstrating with mathematical models how rare mutations could come together in sexual species but not in asexual ones. The sexual species does not have to wait for two rare events in the same individual but can combine them from different individuals. This, they said, would grant the sexual species an advantage over the asexual ones, so long as there were at least one thousand individuals in the sexual ones. All was hunky dory. Sex was explained, as an aid to evolution, and modern mathematics was adding new precision. The case could be considered closed.

### Mankind’s Greatest Rival is Mankind

When the fittest are struggling to survive, with whom are they competing? With other members of their species, or with members of other species?

A gazelle on the African savannah is trying not to be eaten by cheetahs, but it is also trying to outrun other gazelles when a cheetah attacks. What matters to the gazelle is being faster than other gazelles, not being faster than cheetahs. (There is an old story of a philosopher who runs when a bear charges him and his friend. ‘It’s no good, you’ll never outrun a bear,’ says the logical friend. ‘I don’t have to,’ replies the philosopher, ‘I only have to outrun you.’) In the same way, psychologists sometimes wonder why people are endowed with the ability to learn the part of Hamlet, or understand calculus, when neither skill was of much use to mankind in the primitive conditions where his intellect was shaped. Einstein would probably have been as hopeless as anybody in working out how to catch a woolly rhinoceros. Nicholas Humphrey, a Cambridge psychologist, was the first to see clearly the solution to this puzzle. We use our intellects not to solve practical problems, but to outwit each other. Deceiving people, detecting deceit, understanding people’s motives, manipulating people – these are what the intellect is used for. So what matters is not how clever and crafty you are, but how much cleverer and craftier than other people. The value of intellect is infinite. Selection within the species is always going to be more important than selection between the species.

Now this may seem a false dichotomy. After all, the best thing an individual animal can do for its species is to survive and breed. Often, however, the two imperatives will be in conflict. Suppose the individual is a tigress whose territory has recently been invaded by another tigress. Does she welcome the intruder and discuss how best they can cohabit the territory, sharing prey? No, she fights her to the death, which from the point of view of the species is unhelpful. Or suppose the individual is an eaglet of a rare species anxiously watched by conservationists in its nest. Eaglets often kill their younger brothers and sisters in the nest. Good for the individual, bad for the species.

Throughout the world of animals, individuals are fighting individuals, whether of the same species or of another. And indeed, the closest competitor a creature is ever likely to meet is a member of its own species. Natural selection is not going to pick genes that help gazelles survive as a species but hurt the chances of individuals – because such genes will be wiped out long before they can show their benefits. Species are not fighting species, as nations battle other nations.

Wynne-Edwards believed fervently that animals often did things for the species, or at least for the group in which they lived. For example, he thought that sea birds chose not to breed when their numbers were high in order to prevent too much pressure on the food supply. The result of his book was that two factions formed: the group selectionists, who argued that much of animal behaviour was informed by the interests of the group not the individual, and the individual selectionists, who argued that individual interests always triumphed. The group selectionist argument is inherently appealing – we are immersed in the ethic of team spirit and charity. It also seemed to explain animal altruism. Bees die as they sting, trying to save the hive; birds warn each other of predators or help to feed their young siblings; even human beings are prepared to die in acts of selfless heroism, to save others’ lives. But, as we shall see, the appearance is misleading. Animal altruism is a myth; even in the most spectacular cases of selflessness, it turns out that animals are serving the selfish interests of their own genes – if sometimes being careless with their bodies.

### The Rediscovery of the Individual

This was disturbing. It seemed at first to be a very cruel and heartless conclusion to reach, particularly in a decade when economists were tentatively celebrating the discovery that the ideal of helping society could persuade people to pay high taxes to support welfare. Society, they said, need not be based on tempering the greed of individuals, but on appealing to their better natures. And here were biologists coming to exactly the opposite conclusion about animals, depicting a harsh world in which no animal ever sacrificed its own ambitions to the needs of the team or the group. Crocodiles would eat each other’s babies even on the brink of extinction.

Yet that was not what Williams said. He knew full well that individual animals often co-operate and that human society is not a ruthless free-for-all. But he also saw that co-operation is nearly always between close relatives – mothers and children, sister worker bees – or that it is practised where it directly or eventually benefits the individual. The exceptions are few indeed. This is because, where selfishness brings higher rewards than altruism, selfish individuals leave more descendants, so altruists inevitably become extinct. But where altruists help their relatives, they are helping those who share some of their genes, including whatever genes had caused them to be altruistic. So, without any conscious intention on the part of individuals, such genes spread.

But Williams realized that there was one troubling exception to this pattern: sex. The traditional explanation for sex, the Vicar of Bray theory, was essentially group selectionist. It demanded that an individual altruistically share its genes with those of another individual when breeding because if it did not, the species would not innovate and would, a few hundred thousand years later, be outdone by other species that did. Sexual species, it said, were better off than asexual species.

“his is what Williams called __the cost of meiosis__ and Maynard Smith called the cost of males. For what dooms the sexual cave people is simply that half of them are men and men do not produce babies. It is true that men do occasionally help in child rearing, killing woolly rhinos for dinner or whatever, but even that does not really explain why men are necessary. For suppose that the asexual women at first gave birth only when they had intercourse. Again there are precedents. There are grasses that only set seed when fertilized by pollen from a related species, but the seed inherits no genes from the pollen. It is called pseudogamy.20 In this case, the men in the cave would have no idea that they were being genetically excluded and would treat the asexual babies as their own, serving up woolly rhino meat just as they would to their own children.

This thought-experiment illustrates the numerically huge advantage a gene has that makes its owner asexual. Logic such as this set Maynard Smith, Ghiselin and Williams to wondering what compensating advantage of sex there must be, given that every mammal and bird, most invertebrate animals, most plants and fungi, and many protozoa are sexual.

So we are left with an enigma. Sex serves the species, but at the expense of the individual. Individuals could abandon sex and rapidly outnumber their sexual rivals. But they do not. Sex must therefore in some mysterious manner ‘pay its way’ for the individual as well as for the species. How?

### The Master-copy Theory

The leader of the molecular biologists is Harris Bernstein of the University of Arizona. His argument is that sex was invented to repair genes. The first hint of this was the discovery that mutant fruit flies unable to repair genes are unable to ‘recombine’ them either: recombination is the essential procedure in sex, the mixing of genes from the two grandparents of the sperm or egg. Knock out genetic repair and sex stops too.

Bernstein noticed that the tools the cell uses for sex are the same as it uses to repair genes. But he has been unable to convince the geneticists or the ecologists that repair is more than the original, long-superseded purpose of the machinery sex uses. The geneticists say the machinery of sex did indeed evolve from the machinery of gene repair, but that is not the same thing as saying sex exists, today, to repair genes. After all human legs are the descendants of fishes’ fins. But they are designed, nowadays, for walking, not swimming.

A quick digression into molecules is necessary here. DNA, the stuff of genes, is a long, thin molecule that carries information in a simple alphabet of four chemical ‘bases’, like Morse code with two kinds of dot and two kinds of dash. Call these bases ‘letters’: A, C, G and T. The beauty of DNA is that each letter is complementary to another, meaning that it prefers to align itself opposite that other letter. Thus A pairs with T and vice versa, and C with G and vice versa. This means that there is an automatic way of copying DNA: by going along the strand of the molecule stitching together another from the complementary letters. The sequence AAGTTC becomes, on the complementary strand, TTCAAG: copy that and you get the original sequence back again. Every gene normally consists of a strand of DNA and its complementary copy closely entwined in the famous double helix. Special enzymes move up and down the strands and where they find a break repair it by reference to the complementary strand. DNA is continually being damaged by sunlight and chemicals. If it were not for the repair enzymes, it would quite quickly become meaningless gobbledegook.

None the less, the repair theory remains inadequate to the task it has set itself. It is silent on outcrossing. Indeed, if sex is about getting spare copies of genes, it would be better to get them from relatives, than to seek out unrelated members of the species. Bernstein says outcrossing is a way of masking mutations, but this amounts to no more than a restatement of the reason why inbreeding is a bad thing, and sex is the cause of inbreeding, not the consequence.

### Cameras and Ratchets

The geneticists, too, are obsessed with damaged DNA. But whereas Bernstein concentrates on the damage that is repaired, the geneticists talk about the damage that cannot be repaired. They call this mutation.

Scientists used to think of mutations as rare events. But in recent years they have gradually come to realize how many mutations happen. They are accumulated at the rate of about one hundred per genome per generation in mammals. That is, your children will have one hundred differences from you and your spouse in their genes as a result of random copying errors by your enzymes, or as a result of mutations in your ovaries or testicles caused by cosmic rays. Of those hundred, about ninety-nine will not matter: they will be so-called silent or neutral mutations that do not affect the sense of genes. That may not seem many given that you have 75,000 pairs of genes, and many of the changes will be tiny and harmless or will happen in silent DNA between genes. But it is enough to lead to a steady accumulation of defects and, of course, a steady rate of invention of new ideas.

The received wisdom on mutations is that most of them are bad news and a good proportion kill their owners or inheritors (cancer starts as one or more mutations), but that occasionally, among the bad there is a good mutation, a genuine improvement. The sickle-cell-anaemia mutation, for example, can be fatal to those who have two copies of it, but the mutation has actually increased in some parts of Africa, because it gives immunity to malaria.

For many years geneticists concentrated on good mutations and viewed sex as a way of distributing them among the population, like the ‘cross-fertilization’ of good ideas in universities and industries. Just as technology needs ‘sex’ to bring in new innovations from outside, so an animal or plant that relies on only its own inventions will be slow to innovate. The solution is to beg, steal and borrow the inventions of other animals and plants: to get hold of their genes in the way that companies copy each other’s inventions. Plant breeders who try to combine high yield, short stems and disease resistance in rice plants are acting like manufacturers with access to many different inventors. Breeders of asexual plants must wait for the inventions to accumulate slowly within the same lineage. One of the reasons the common mushroom has changed very little over the three centuries that it has been in cultivation is that mushrooms are asexual and so no selective breeding has been possible.

The most obvious reason to borrow genes is because you can benefit from the ingenuity of others as well as yourself. Sex brings together mutations, constantly rearranging genes into new combinations until fortuitous synergy results. One ancestor of a giraffe, for example, might have invented a longer neck while another invented longer legs. The two together were better than either alone.

But this argument confuses consequence with cause. Its advantages are far too remote; they will appear after a few generations, by which time any asexual competitor will long ago have outnumbered its sexual rivals. Besides, if sex is good at throwing together good combinations of genes it will be even better at breaking them up. The one thing you can be sure about sexual creatures is that their offspring will be different from them, as many a Caesar, Bourbon and Plantagenet discovered to their disappointment. Plant breeders much prefer varieties of wheat or corn that are male-sterile and produce seeds without sex, because it enables them to be sure their good varieties will breed true.


Excerpt From: Matt Ridley. “THE RED QUEEN.” iBooks. 

