

The tragedy of the commons is, for economists, a matter of ownership. The lack of a single ownership of the commons or the fishery means that everybody shares equally in the cost of overgrazing or overfishing. But the individual who grazes one too many cows, or the fisherman who catches one too many netfuls, still gets the whole of the reward of that cow or netful. So he reaps the benefits privately and shares the costs publicly. It is a one-way ticket to riches for the individual and a one-way ticket to poverty for the village. Individually rational behaviour leads to a collectively irrational outcome. The free-rider wins at the expense of the good citizen.

Exactly the same problem plagues the world of the genes. It is, oddly, the reason that boys are different from girls.

None of the theories discussed so far explains why there are two separate genders.2 Why is everybody not a hermaphrodite, mixing its genes with those of others, but avoiding the cost of maleness by being a female, too? For that matter, why are there two genders at all, even in hermaphrodites? Why not just give each other parcels of genes, as equals? ‘Why sex?’ makes no sense without ‘why sexes?’ As it happens, there is an answer. This chapter is about perhaps the strangest of all the Red Queen theories, the one that goes under the unprepossessing name of ‘intragenomic conflict’. Translated, it is about harmony and selfishness, about conflicts of interest between genes inside bodies, about free-rider genes and outlaw genes. And it claims that many of the features of a sexual creature arose as reactions to this conflict, not to be of use to the individual. It ‘gives an unstable, interactive and historical character to the evolutionary process’.

The 75,000 pairs of genes that make and run the average human body find themselves in much the same position as 75,000 human beings inhabiting a small town. Just as human society is an uneasy coexistence of free enterprise and social co-operation, so is the activity of genes within a body. Without co-operation, the town would not be a community. Everybody would lie and cheat and steal his way to wealth at the expense of everybody else and all social activities – commerce, government, education, sport – would grind to a mistrustful halt. Without co-operation between the genes, the body they inhabit could not be used to transmit those genes to future generations because it would never get built.

A generation ago, most biologists would have found that paragraph baffling. Genes are not conscious and do not choose to co-operate; they are inanimate molecules switched on or off by chemical messages. What causes them to work in the right order and create a human body is some mysterious biochemical program, not a democratic decision. But in the last few years, the revolution begun by Williams, Hamilton and others has caused more and more biologists to think of genes as analogous to active and cunning individuals. Not that genes are conscious or driven by future goals: no serious biologist believes that. But the extraordinary teleological fact is that evolution works by natural selection and natural selection means the enhanced survival of genes that enhance their own survival. Therefore a gene is by definition the descendant of a gene that was good at getting into future generations. Therefore, a gene that does things that enhance its own survival may be said, teleologically, to be doing them because they enhance its survival. Co-operating to build a body is as effective a survival ‘strategy’ for genes as co-operating to run a town is a successful social strategy for human beings.

But society is not all co-operation. A measure of competitive free enterprise is inevitable. A gigantic experiment called communism in a laboratory called Russia proved that. The simple, beautiful suggestion that society should be organized on the principle ‘from each according to his abilities, to each according to his needs’ proved disastrously unrealistic, because each did not see why he should share the fruits of his labours with a system that gave him no reward for working harder. Enforced co-operation of the communist kind is as vulnerable to the selfish ambitions of the individual as a free-for-all would be. Likewise, if a gene has the effect of enhancing the survival of the body it inhabits but prevents that body breeding, or is itself never transmitted through breeding, then that gene will by definition become extinct and its effect will disappear.

Finding the right balance between co-operation and competition has been the goal and bane of western politics for centuries. Adam Smith recognized that the economic needs of the individual are better met by unleashing the ambitions of all individuals than by planning to meet those needs in advance. But even Adam Smith could not claim that free markets would produce Utopia. Even the most libertarian politician today believes in the need to regulate, oversee and tax the efforts of ambitious individuals so as to ensure that they do not satisfy their ambitions entirely at the expense of others. In the words of Egbert Leigh, a biologist at the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, ‘Human intelligence has yet to design a society where free competition among the members works for the good of the whole.’ The society of genes faces exactly the same problem. Each gene is descended from a gene that unwittingly jostled to get into the next generation by whatever means was in its power. Co-operation between them is marked, but so is competition. And it is that competition that led to the invention of gender.

As life emerged from the primeval soup several billion years ago, the molecules that caused themselves to be replicated at the expense of others became more numerous. Then some of those molecules discovered the virtues of co-operation and specialization, so they began to assemble in groups called chromosomes to run machines called cells that could replicate these chromosomes efficiently. In just the same way little groups of agriculturalists joined with blacksmiths and carpenters to form co-operative units called villages. The chromosomes then discovered that several kinds of cell could merge to form a super cell, just as villages began to group together as tribes. This was the invention of the modern cell from a team of different bacteria. The cells then grouped together to make animals and plants and fungi, great big conglomerates of conglomerates of genes, just as tribes merged into countries and countries into empires.

None of this would have been possible for society without laws to enforce the social interest over the individual, selfish drive; it was the same with genes. A gene has only one criterion by which posterity judges it: whether it becomes an ancestor of other genes. To a large extent it must achieve that at the expense of other genes, just as a man acquires wealth largely by persuading others to part with it (legally or illegally). If the gene is on its own, all other genes are its enemies: every man for himself. If the gene is part of a coalition, then they share the same interest in defeating a rival coalition, just as employees of Boeing share the same interest in its thriving at the expense of Airbus.

This broadly describes the world of viruses and bacteria. They are disposable vehicles for simple teams of genes, each team highly competitive with other teams but with largely harmonious relations between team members. For reasons that will soon become apparent, this harmony breaks down when bacteria merge to become cells and cells merge to become organisms. It has to be reasserted by laws and bureaucracies.

And even at the bacterial level it does not entirely hold true. For consider the case of a new, supercharged mutant gene that appears in a bacterium. It is superior to all other genes of its type, but its fate is determined largely by the quality of its team. It is like a brilliant engineer finding himself employed by a doomed, small firm, or a brilliant athlete stuck in a second-rate team. Just as the engineer or the athlete seeks a transfer, so we might expect that bacterial genes would have invented a way to transfer themselves from one bacteria to another.

They have. It is called conjugation, and it is widely agreed to be a form of sex itself. Two bacteria simply connect to each other by a narrow pipe and shunt some copies of genes across. Unlike sex it has nothing to do with reproduction and it is a relatively rare event. But in every other respect, it is sex. It is genetic trade.

### Nobody is Descended from Abel

The greatest opportunity for selfish genes comes during sex. Most animals and plants are diploid: their genes come in pairs. But diploidy is an uneasy partnership between two sets of genes and when partnerships end, things often get acrimonious. The partnerships end with sex. During meiosis, the central genetic procedure of sex, the paired genes are separated to make haploid sperm and eggs. Suddenly each gene has an opportunity to be selfish at its partner’s expense. If it can monopolize the eggs or sperm, it thrives and its partner does not.

This opportunity has been explored in recent years by a group of young biologists, prominent among them Steve Frank, of the University of California at Irvine, and Laurence Hurst, Andrew Pomiankowski, David Haig and Alan Grafen at Oxford University. Their logic goes like this. When a woman conceives, her embryo gets only half of her genes. They are the lucky ones; the unlucky other half languish in obscurity in the hope of another toss of the coin when she next breeds. For, to recapitulate, you have 23 pairs of chromosomes, 23 from your father and 23 from your mother. When you make an egg or a sperm you will pick one from each pair to give a total of 23 chromosomes. You could give it all the ones you inherited from your mother or all the ones from your father, or more likely a mixture of the two. Now a selfish gene that loaded the dice so that it stood a better than fifty-fifty chance of getting into the embryo might do rather well. Suppose it simply killed off its opposite number, the one that came from the other grandparent of the embryo.

Meiotic-drive genes are known from flies and mice and a few other creatures, but they are rare. Why? For the same reason that murder is rare. The interest of the other genes has been reasserted through laws. Genes, like people, have other things to do than kill each other. Those genes that shared Abel’s chromosome and died with him would have survived had they invented some technique to foil Cain. Or, to put it another way, genes that foil meiotic drivers will spread as surely as meiotic drivers will spread. A Red Queen race is the result.

Cain genes survive in mice and flies by hugging their masks close to them so that they are not likely to be parted by crossing over. But there is one pair of chromosomes that is especially plagued by Cain genes – the ‘sex chromosomes’, which do not engage in crossing over. In people and many other animals gender is determined by genetic lottery. If you receive a pair of X chromosomes from your parents you become a female; if you receive an X and a Y you become a male (unless you are a bird, spider or butterfly, in which case it is the other way round). Because Y chromosomes contain the genes for determining maleness, they are not compatible with Xs and they do not cross over with them. Consequently, a Cain gene on an X chromosome can safely kill the Y chromosome and not risk suicide. It biases the sex ratio of the next generation in favour of females, but that is a cost borne by the whole population equally, whereas the benefit of monopolizing the offspring is received by the Cain gene itself – just as in the case of free-riders causing the tragedy of the commons.

### “In Praise of Unilateral Disarmament”

Excerpt From: Matt Ridley. “THE RED QUEEN.” iBooks. 



Excerpt From: Matt Ridley. “THE RED QUEEN.” iBooks. 

Excerpt From: Matt Ridley. “THE RED QUEEN.” iBooks. 
