Why sex? Surely there are other features of human nature than this one overexposed and troublesome procreative pastime? True enough, but reproduction is the sole goal for which human beings are designed; everything else is a means to that end. Human beings inherit tendencies to survive, to eat, to think, to speak and so on. But above all, they inherit a tendency to reproduce. Those of their predecessors that reproduced passed on their characteristics to their offspring; those that remained barren did not. Therefore, anything which increased the chances of a person reproducing successfully was passed on at the expense of everything else. We can confidently assert that there is nothing in our natures that was not carefully ‘chosen’ in this way for its ability to contribute to eventual reproductive success.

This seems an astonishingly hubristic claim. It seems to deny free will, ignore those who choose chastity and portray human beings as programmed robots bent only on procreation. It seems to imply that Mozart and Shakespeare were motivated only by sex. Yet I know of no other way that human nature can have developed, except by evolution, and there is now overwhelming evidence that there is no other way for evolution to work except by competitive reproduction. Those strains that reproduce persist; those that do not reproduce die out. The ability to reproduce is what makes living things different from rocks. Besides, there is nothing inconsistent with free will or even chastity in this view of life. Human beings, I believe, thrive according to their ability to take initiatives and exercise individual talent. But free will was not created for fun; there was a reason that evolution handed our ancestors the ability to take initiatives and the reason was that free will and initiative are means to satisfy ambition, to compete with fellow human beings, to deal with life’s emergencies, and so eventually to be in a better position to reproduce and rear children than human beings who do not reproduce. Therefore free will itself is only any good to the extent that it contributes to eventual reproduction.

Everything can be inherited except sterility. Consequently, if we are to understand how human nature evolved, the very core of our inquiry must be reproduction, for reproductive success is the examination that all human genes must pass if they are not to be squeezed out by natural selection. Hence I am going to argue that there are very few features of the human psyche and nature that can be understood without reference to reproduction. I begin with sexuality itself. Reproduction is not synonymous with sex; there are many asexual ways to reproduce. But reproducing sexually must improve an individual’s reproductive success or else sex would not persist. I end with intelligence, the most human of all features. It is increasingly hard to understand how human beings came to be so clever without considering sexual competition.

### Of Nature and Nurture

The idea that we were designed by our past was the principal insight of Charles Darwin. He was the first to realize that you can abandon divine creation of species without abandoning the argument from design. Every living thing is ‘designed’ quite unconsciously by the selective reproduction of its own ancestors to suit a particular lifestyle. Human nature was as carefully designed by natural selection for the use of a social, bipedal, originally African ape, as human stomachs were designed for the use of an omnivorous African ape with a taste for meat.

Weismann noticed something peculiar about most sexual creatures: their sex cells – eggs and sperm – remained segregated from the rest of the body from the moment of their birth. He wrote:

"I believe that heredity depends upon the fact that a small portion of the effective substance of the germ, the germ-plasm, remains unchanged during the development of the ovum into an organism, and that this part of the germ-plasm serves as a foundation from which germ-cells of the new organism are produced. There is, therefore, continuity of the germ-plasm from one generation to another.”

In other words, you are descended not from your mother, but from her ovary. Nothing that happened to her body or her mind in her life could affect your nature.

### The Individual in Society

It is one of the remarkable things about the human race that no two people are identical. No father is exactly recast in his son; no daughter is exactly like her mother; no man is his brother’s double and no woman a carbon copy of her sister – unless they are that rarity, a pair of identical twins. Every idiot can be father or mother to a genius – and vice versa. Every face and every set of finger prints is effectively unique. Indeed, this uniqueness goes further in human beings than in any other animal.

How can this be? How can there be a universal, species-specific human nature when every human being is unique? The solution to this paradox lies in the process known as sex. For it is sex that mixes together the genes of two people and discards half of the mixture, so ensuring that no child is exactly like either of its parents. And it is also sex that causes all genes to be contributed eventually to the pool of the whole species by such mixing. Sex causes the differences between individuals but ensures that those differences never diverge far from a golden mean for the whole species.

But the uniqueness of the individual is only the first of the implications of sex for human nature. Another is that there are in fact two human natures: male and female. The basic asymmetry of gender leads inevitably to different natures for the two genders, natures that suit the particular role of each gender. For example, males usually compete for access to females, rather than vice versa. There are good evolutionary reasons for this and there are clear evolutionary consequences, too; for instance men are more aggressive than women.

A third implication of sex for human natures is that every other human being alive today is a potential source of genes for your children. And we are descended from only those people who sought the best genes, a habit we inherited from them. Therefore, if you spot somebody with good genes it is your inherited habit to seek to buy some of those genes; or, put more prosaically, people are attracted to people of high reproductive and genetic potential – the healthy, the fit and the powerful. The consequences of this fact, which goes under the name of sexual selection, are bizarre in the extreme, as shall become clear in later chapters.

### Ours to Reason Why?

In other words, I believe that it is always worth asking the question: why? Most of science is the dry business of discovering how the universe works, how the sun shines or how plants grow. Most scientists live their lives steeped in ‘how’ questions, not ‘why’ questions. But consider for a moment the difference between the question ‘Why do men fall in love?’ and the question ‘How do men fall in love?’ The answer to the second will surely turn out to be merely a matter of plumbing. Men fall in love through the effects of hormones on brain cells and vice versa, or some such physiological effect. One day some scientist will know exactly how the brain of a young man becomes obsessed with the image of a particular young woman, molecule by molecule. But the why question is to me more interesting, because the answer “gets to the heart of how human nature came to be what it is.

Why has that man fallen in love with that woman? Because she’s pretty. Why does pretty matter? Because human beings are a mainly monogamous species and so males are choosy about their mates (as male chimpanzees are not); prettiness is an indication of youth and health, which are indications of fertility. Why does that man care about fertility in his mate? Because if he did not, his genes would be eclipsed by those of men who did. Why does he care about that? He does not, but his genes act as if they do. Those who choose infertile mates leave no descendants. Therefore everybody is descended from men who preferred fertile women and every person inherits from those ancestors the same preference. Why is that man a slave to his genes? He is not. He has free will. But you just said he’s in love because it is good for his genes. He’s free to ignore the dictates of his genes. Why do his genes want to get together with her genes anyway? Because that’s the only way they can get into the next generation; human beings have two sexes which must breed by mixing their genes. Why do human beings have two sexes? Because in mobile animals hermaphrodites are less good at doing two things at once than males and females are at each doing his or her own thing. Therefore ancestral hermaphroditic animals were outmanoeuvred by ancestral sexed animals. But why only two sexes? Because that was the only way to settle a long-running genetic dispute between sets of genes. What? I’ll explain later. But why does she need him? Why don’t her genes just go ahead and make babies without waiting for his input? That is the most fundamental why question of all, and the one with which the next chapter begins.

### Of Conflict and Cooperation 

This concept, that all progress is relative, has come to be known in biology by the name of the Red Queen, after a chess piece that Alice meets in Through the Looking Glass, who perpetually runs without getting very far because the landscape moves with her. It is an increasingly influential idea in evolutionary theory, and one that will recur throughout the book. The faster you run, the more the world moves with you and the less you make progress. Life is a chess tournament in which if you win a game, you start the next game with the handicap of a missing pawn.

In the world of the Red Queen, any evolutionary progress will be relative, so long as your foe is animate and depends heavily on you or suffers heavily if you thrive, like the seals and the bears. Thus the Red Queen will be especially hard at work among predators and their prey, parasites and their hosts, and males and females of the same species. Every creature on earth is in a Red Queen chess tournament with its parasites (or hosts), its predators (or prey) and, above all, with its mate.

Just as parasites depend on their hosts yet make them suffer, and just as animals exploit their mates yet need them, so the Red Queen never appears without another theme being sounded: the theme of intermingled co-operation and conflict. The relationship between a mother and her child is fairly straightforward: both are seeking roughly the same goal – the welfare of themselves and each other. The relationship between a man and his wife’s lover, or between a woman and her rival for a promotion, is also fairly straightforward: both want the worst for each other. The former two relationships are all about co-operation and the latter two about conflict and competition. But what is the relationship between a woman and her husband? It is co-operation, in the sense that both want the best for the other. But why? In order to exploit each other. A man uses his wife to produce children for him. A woman uses her husband to make and help rear her children. Marriage teeters on the line between a co-operative venture and a form of mutual exploitation – ask any divorce lawyer. Successful marriages so submerge the costs under mutual benefits that the co-operation can predominate; unsuccessful ones do not.

This is one of the great recurring themes of human history, the balance between co-operation and conflict. It is the obsession of governments and families, of lovers and rivals. It is the key to economics. It is, as we shall see, one of the oldest themes in the history of life, for it is repeated right down to the level of the gene itself. And the principal cause of it is sex. Sex, like marriage, is a co-operative venture between two rival sets of genes. Your body is the scene of this uneasy coexistence.

### To Choose

One of Charles Darwin’s more obscure ideas was that animals’ mates can act like horse breeders, consistently selecting certain types and so changing the race. This theory, known as __sexual selection__, was ignored for many years after Darwin’s death and has only recently come back into vogue. __Its principal insight is that the goal of an animal is not just to survive, but to breed. Indeed, where breeding and survival come into conflict, it is breeding that takes precedence.__ Salmon, for example, starve to death while breeding. And breeding, in sexual species, consists of finding an appropriate partner and persuading it to part with a package of genes. This goal is so central to life that it has influenced the design not only of the body, but also of the psyche. Simply put, anything that increases reproductive success will spread at the expense of anything that does not – even if it threatens survival.

Testosterone itself, the very elixir of masculinity, increases susceptibility to infectious disease. Men’s more competitive nature is a consequence of sexual selection. Men have evolved to live dangerously because success in competition or battle used to lead to more or better sexual conquests and more surviving children. Women who live dangerously merely put at risk those children they already have. Likewise, the intimate connection between female beauty and female reproductive potential (beautiful women are almost by definition young and healthy; compared to older women, they are therefore both more fertile and have a longer reproductive life ahead of them) is a consequence of sexual selection acting on both men’s psyches and women’s bodies. Each sex shapes the other. Women have hourglass-shaped bodies because men have preferred them that way. Men have an aggressive nature because women have preferred them that way (or have allowed aggressive men to defeat other men in contests over women – it amounts to the same thing). Indeed, this book will end with the astonishing theory that the human intellect itself is a product of sexual, rather than natural, selection. For most evolutionary anthropologists now believe that big brains contributed to reproductive success either by enabling men to outwit and outscheme other men (and women to outwit and outscheme other women), or because big brains were originally used to court and seduce members of the other sex.

Excerpt From: Matt Ridley. “THE RED QUEEN.” iBooks. 

Excerpt From: Matt Ridley. “THE RED QUEEN.” iBooks. 
