### The Art of Being Slightly Different

In 1966, George Williams exposed the logical flaw at the heart of the textbook explanation of sex. He showed how it required animals to ignore short-term self-interest in order to further the survival and evolution of their species, a form of self-restraint that could only have evolved under very peculiar circumstances. He was very unsure what to put in its place. But he noticed that sex and dispersal often seem to be linked. Thus, grass grows asexual runners to propagate locally, but commits its sexually produced seeds to the wind to travel further. Sexual aphids grow wings; asexual ones do not. The suggestion that immediately follows is that if your young are going to have to travel abroad, then it is better that they vary, because abroad may not be like home.

Elaborating that idea was the main activity of ecologists interested in sex throughout the 1970s. In 1971, in his first attack on the problem, John Maynard Smith suggested that sex was needed for those cases in which two different creatures migrate into a new habitat in which it helps to combine both their characters. Two years later Williams returned to the fray and suggested that if most of the young are going to die, as most who try their luck as travellers will, then it may be the very fittest ones that will survive. It therefore matters not one jot how many young of average quality a creature has. What counts is having a handful of young that are exceptional. If you want your son to become pope, the best way to achieve this is not to have lots of identical sons, but to have lots of different sons in the hope that one is good, clever and religious enough.

The common analogy for what Williams was describing is a lottery. Breeding asexually is like having lots of lottery tickets all with the same number. To stand a chance of winning the lottery you need lots of different tickets. Therefore sex is useful to the individual, as well as the species, when the offspring are likely to face changed or unusual conditions.

### The Tangled Bank

Bell’s verdict on the lottery model was scathing: "Accepted, at least as a conceptual foundation, by the best minds which have contemplated the function of sexuality, it seems utterly to fail the test of comparative analysis."

Lottery models predict that sex should be commonest where in fact it is rarest – among highly fecund, small creatures in changeable environments. On the contrary, here sex is the exception; but in big, long-lived, slow-breeding creatures in stable environments sex is the rule.

Graham Bell has called this the ‘tangled bank’ theory, after the famous last paragraph of Charles Darwin’s The Origin of Species: "It is interesting to contemplate an entangled bank, clothed with many plants of many kinds, with birds singing on the bushes, with various insects flitting about, and with worms crawling through the damp earth, and to reflect that these elaborately constructed forms, so different from each other, and dependent upon each other in so complex a manner, have all been produced by laws acting around us."

It is hard to find dedicated enthusiasts of tangled banks these days. Their main trouble is a familiar one: if it ain’t broke, why does sex need to fix it? An oyster that has grown large enough to breed is a great success, in oyster terms. Most of its siblings are dead. If, as tangled bankers assume, the genes had something to do with that, then why must we automatically assume that the combination of genes that won in this generation will be a flop in the next? There are ways round this difficulty for tangled bankers, but they sound a bit like special pleading. It is easy enough to identify an individual case where sex would have some advantage, but to raise it to a general principle for every habitat of every mammal and bird, for every coniferous tree, a principle that can give a big enough advantage to overcome the fact that asex is twice as fecund as sex – nobody can quite bring himself to do that.

### The Red Queen

One day in 1973, before his beard was so grey, Van Valen was searching his capacious mind for a phrase to express a new discovery he had made while studying marine fossils. The discovery was that the probability that a family of animals will become extinct does not depend on how long that family has already existed. In other words, species do not get better at surviving (nor do they grow feeble with age, as individuals do). Their chances of extinction are random.

The significance of this discovery had not escaped Van Valen, for it represented a vital truth about evolution that Darwin had not wholly appreciated. The struggle for existence never gets easier. However well a species may adapt to its environment, it can never relax, because its competitors and its enemies are also adapting to their niches. Survival is a zero-sum game. Success only makes one species a more tempting target for another rival species. Van Valen’s mind went back to his childhood and lit upon the living chess pieces that Alice encountered beyond the looking glass. The Red Queen is a formidable woman who runs like the wind but never seems to get anywhere.

A new evolutionary law’, wrote Van Valen and sent a manuscript to each of the most prestigious scientific journals in turn – only to see it rejected. Yet his claim was justified. The Red Queen has become a great personage in the biological court. And nowhere has she won a greater reputation than in theories of sex.

__Red Queen theories hold that the world is competitive to the death. It does keep changing. But did we not just hear that species are static for many generations and do not change? Yes. The point about the Red Queen is that she runs, but stays in the same place. The world keeps coming back to where it started; change there is, but not progress.__

__Sex, according to the Red Queen theory, has nothing to do with adapting to the inanimate world – becoming bigger, or better camouflaged, or more tolerant of cold, or better at flying – but is all about combating the enemy that fights back.__

Biologists have persistently overestimated the importance of physical causes of premature death rather than biological ones. In virtually any account of evolution, drought, frost, wind, or starvation loom large as the enemies of life. The great struggle, we are told, is to adapt to these conditions. Marvels of physical adaptation – the camel’s hump, the polar bear’s fur, the rotifer’s boil-resistant tun – are held to be among evolution’s greatest achievements. The first ecological theories of sex were all directed at explaining this adaptability to the physical environment. But with the tangled bank, a different theme has begun to be heard, and in the Red Queen’s march it is the dominant tune. The things that kill animals or prevent them reproducing are only rarely physical factors. Far more often they are other creatures – parasites, predators and competitors. A water flea that is starving in a crowded pond is the victim not of food shortage but of competition. Predators and parasites probably cause most of the world’s deaths, directly or indirectly. When a tree falls in the forest, it has usually been weakened by a fungus. When a herring meets its end it is usually in the mouth of a bigger fish or a net. What killed your ancestors two centuries or more ago? Smallpox, tuberculosis, influenza, pneumonia, plague, scarlet fever, diarrhoea. Starvation or accidents may have weakened people, but infection killed them. A few of the wealthier ones died of old age, or cancer, or heart attacks, but not many.

Again and again in recent years, evolutionary biologists have found themselves returning to the theme of parasites. As Richard Dawkins put it in a recent paper: " Eavesdrop [over] morning coffee at any major centre of evolutionary theory today, and you will find ‘parasite’ to be one of the commonest words in the language. Parasites are touted as the prime movers in the evolution of sex, promising a final solution to that problem of problems.

Parasites have a deadlier effect than predators for two reasons. One is that there are more of them. Human beings have no predators except great white sharks and each other, but they have lots of parasites. Even rabbits, which are eaten by stoats, weasels, foxes, buzzards, dogs and people, are host to far more fleas, lice, ticks, mosquitoes, tapeworms, and uncounted varieties of protozoa, bacteria, fungi and viruses. The myxomatosis virus has killed far more rabbits than foxes have. The second reason, which is the cause of the first, is that parasites are usually smaller than their hosts while predators are usually larger. This means that the parasites live shorter lives and pass through more generations in a given time than their hosts. The bacteria in your gut pass through six times as many generations during your lifetime as people have passed through since they were apes.26 As a consequence, they can multiply faster than their hosts and control or reduce the host population. The predator merely follows the abundance of its prey.

Parasites and their hosts are locked in a close evolutionary embrace. The more successful the parasite’s attack (the more hosts it infects or the more resources it gets from each), the more the host’s chances of survival will depend on whether it can invent a defence. The better the host defends, the more natural selection will promote the parasites that can overcome the defence. So the advantage will always be swinging from one to the other: the more dire the emergency for one, the better it will fight. This is truly the world of the Red Queen, where you never win, you only gain a temporary respite.

### Battles of Wit

It is also the inconstant world of sex. Parasites provide exactly the incentive to change genes every generation that sex seems to demand. The success of the genes that defended you so well in the last generation may be the best of reasons to abandon these same gene combinations in the next. By the time the next generation comes around, the parasites will have surely evolved an answer to the defence that worked best in the last generation. It is a bit like sport. In chess or in football, the tactic that proves most effective is soon the one that people learn easily to block. Every innovation in attack is soon countered by another in defence.

But of course the usual analogy is an arms race. America builds an atom bomb, so Russia does, too. America builds missiles; so must Russia. Tank after tank, helicopter after helicopter, bomber after bomber, submarine after submarine, the two countries run against each other, yet stay in the same place. Weapons that would have been invincible twenty years before are now vulnerable and obsolete. The bigger the lead of one superpower, the harder the other tries to catch up. Neither dares step off the treadmill while it can afford to stay in the race. Only when the economy of Russia collapses, does the arms race cease (or pause).

These arms-race analogies should not be taken too seriously, but they do lead to some interesting insights. Richard Dawkins and John Krebs raised one argument derived from arms races to the level of a ‘principle’: the ‘life–dinner principle’. A rabbit running from a fox is running for its life, so it has the greater evolutionary incentive to be fast. The fox is merely after its dinner. True enough, but what about a gazelle running from a cheetah? Whereas foxes eat things other than rabbits, cheetahs eat only gazelles, so a slow cheetah never catches anything and dies. A slow gazelle might never be unlucky enough to meet a cheetah. So the down-side is greater for the cheetah. As Dawkins and Krebs put it, the specialist will usually win the race.

“Parasites are supreme specialists, but arms-race analogies are less reliable for them. The flea that lives in the cheetah’s ear has what economists call an ‘identity of interest’ with the cheetah: if the cheetah dies, it dies. Gary Larson once drew a cartoon of a flea walking through the hairs on a dog’s back carrying a placard that read: ‘The end of the dog is nigh’: the death of the dog is bad news for the flea, even if the flea hastened it. The question of whether parasites benefit from harming their hosts has vexed parasitologists for many years. When a parasite first encounters a new host (myxomatosis in European rabbits, AIDS in human beings, plague in fourteenth-century Europeans) it usually starts off as extremely virulent, but gradually becomes less so. But some diseases remain fatal while others quickly become almost harmless. The explanation is simple: the more contagious the disease, and the fewer resistant hosts there are around, the easier it will be to find a new host. So contagious diseases in unresistant populations need not worry about killing their hosts, because they have already moved on. But when most potential hosts are already infected or resistant, and the parasite has difficulty moving from host to host, it must take care not to kill its own livelihood. In the same way an industrial boss who pleads with his workers, ‘Please don’t strike, or the company will go bust’, is likely to be more persuasive if unemployment is high than if the workers already have other job offers. Yet, even where virulence declines, the host is still being hurt by the parasite and is still under pressure to improve its defences, while the parasite is continually trying to get around those defences and sequester more resources to itself at the host’s expense.

### Picking DNA’s Locks

Evolutionary tortoises none the less do more genetic mixing than evolutionary hares. Austin Burt’s discovery of a correlation between generation length and amount of recombination is evidence of the Red Queen at work. The longer your generation time, the more genetic mixing you need to combat your parasites. Bell and Burt also discovered that the mere presence of a rogue parasitic chromosome called a B-chromosome is enough to induce extra recombination (more genetic mixing) in a species.35 Sex seems to be an essential part of combating parasites. But how?

Leaving aside for the moment such things as fleas and mosquitoes, let us concentrate on viruses, bacteria and fungi, the causes of most diseases. They specialize in breaking into cells, either to eat them, as fungi and bacteria do, or, like viruses, to subvert their genetic machinery for the purpose of making new viruses. Either way, they must get into cells. To do that they employ protein molecules that fit into other molecules on cell surfaces: in the jargon, they bind. The arms races between parasites and their hosts are all about these binding proteins. Parasites invent new keys; hosts change the locks. There is an obvious group-selectionist argument here for sex: at any one time a sexual species will have lots of different locks; members of an asexual one will all have the same locks. So a parasite with the right key will quickly exterminate the asexual species but not the sexual one. Hence the well-known fact that by turning our fields over to monocultures of increasingly inbred strains of wheat and maize we are inviting the very epidemics of disease that can only be fought by the pesticides we are forced to use in ever larger quantities.

The Red Queen’s case is both subtler and stronger than that, though. It is that an individual, by having sex, can produce offspring more likely to survive than an individual that produces clones of itself. The advantage of sex can appear in a single generation. This is because whatever lock is common in one generation will produce among the parasites the key that fits it. So you can be sure that it is the very lock not to have a few generations later. For by then the key that fits it will be common. Rarity is at a premium.

As soon as a lock gene becomes rare, the parasite key gene that fits it becomes rare, so that lock gains an advantage. In a case where rarity is at a premium, the advantage is always swinging from one gene to another and no gene is ever allowed to become extinct. To be sure, there are other mechanisms that can favour polymorphism: anything that gives rare genes a selective advantage over common genes. Predators often do this, by overlooking rare forms and picking out common forms. Give a bird in a cage some concealed pieces of food, most of which are painted red but a few painted green, and it will quickly get the idea that red things are edible, and will initially overlook green things. J. B. S. Haldane was the first to realize that parasitism, even more than predation, could help to maintain polymorphism, especially if the parasite’s increased success in attacking a new variety of host goes with reduced success against an old variety – which would be the case with keys and locks.

The key and lock metaphor deserves closer scrutiny. In flax, for example, there are twenty-seven versions of five different genes that confer resistance to a rust fungus: twenty-seven versions of five locks. Each lock is fitted by several versions of one key gene in the rust. The virulence of the rust fungus attack is determined by how well its five keys fit the flax’s five locks. It is not quite like real keys and locks because there are partial fits: the rust does not have to open every lock before it can infect the flax. But the more locks it opens, the more virulent its effects.

### The Similarity between Sex and Vaccination

At this point the alert know-alls among my readers will be seething with impatience at my neglect of the immune system. The normal way to fight a disease, they point out, is not to have sex but to produce antibodies, by vaccination or whatever. The immune system is a fairly recent invention in evolutionary terms: it started in the reptiles perhaps 300 million years ago. Frogs, fish, insects, lobsters, snails and water fleas do not have immune systems. Even so, there is now an ingenious theory that marries the immune system with sex in an overarching Red Queen hypothesis. Hans Bremermann, of the University of California at Berkeley, is its author and he makes a fascinating case for the interdependence of the two. The immune system, he points out, would not work without sex.

The immune system consists of white blood cells which come in about ten million different types. Each type has a protein lock on it called an antibody, which corresponds to a key carried by a bacterium called an antigen. If a key enters that lock, the white cell starts multiplying ferociously so as to produce an army of white cells to gobble up the key-carrying invader, be it a flu virus, a tuberculosis bacterium or even the cells of a transplanted heart. But the body has a problem. It cannot keep armies of each antibody lock ready to immobilize all types of keys, because there is room for millions of cells of one type, or one cell each of millions of types, but not for millions of cells of millions of types. So it keeps only a few copies of each white cell. As soon as one type of white cell meets the antigen that fits its locks, it begins multiplying. Hence the delay between the onset of flu and the immune response that cures you.

Each lock is generated by a sort of random assembly device, which tries to maintain as broad a library of kinds of lock as it can, even if some of the keys that fit them have never yet been found in parasites. This is because the parasites are continually changing their keys to try to find ones that fit the host’s changing locks. The immune system is therefore prepared. But this randomness means that the host is bound to produce white cells that are designed to attack its own cells among the many types it invents. To get around this, the host’s own cells are equipped with a password, known as a major histocompatibility antigen. This stops the attack.

To win, then, the parasite must either hope to infect somebody else by the time the immune response hits (as influenza does), conceal itself inside host cells (as the AIDS virus does), change its own keys frequently (as malaria does) or try to imitate whatever password the host’s own cells carry that enable them to escape attention. Bilharzia parasites, for example, grab password molecules from host cells and stick them all over their bodies to camouflage themselves from passing white cells. Trypanosomes, which cause sleeping sickness, keep changing their keys by switching on one gene after another. The AIDS virus is craftiest of all. According to one theory, it seems to keep mutating so that each generation has different keys. Time after time the host has locks that fit the keys and the virus gets suppressed. But eventually, after perhaps ten years, the virus’s random mutation hits upon a key that the host just does not have a lock for. At that point, the virus has won. It has found the gap in the repertoire of the immune system’s locks and it runs riot. In essence, according to this theory, the AIDS virus evolves until it finds a chink in the body’s immune armour.

Other parasites try to mimic the passwords carried by the host. The selective pressure is on all pathogens to mimic the passwords of their hosts. The selective pressure is on all hosts to keep changing the password. This, according to Bremermann, is where sex comes in.

The histocompatibility genes, which determine more than the passwords, but are themselves responsible for susceptibility to disease, are richly polymorphic. There are over one hundred versions of each histocompatibility gene in the average population of mice, and even more in human beings. Every person carries a unique combination, which is why transplants between people other than identical twins are always rejected, unless special drugs are taken. And without sexual outbreeding, it is impossible to maintain that polymorphism.

### Sexless Snails

But these are all hints from natural history, not careful scientific experiments. There is also a small amount of more direct evidence in favour of the parasite theory of sex. By far the most thorough study of the Red Queen was done in New Zealand by a soft-spoken American biologist named Curtis Lively, who became intrigued by the evolution of sex when told to write an essay on the subject as a student. He soon abandoned his other research, determined to solve the problem of sex. He went to New Zealand and examined water snails from streams and lakes and found that in many populations there are no males and the females give birth as virgins, but in other populations the females mate with males and produce sexual offspring. So he was able to sample the snails, count the males and get a rough-and-ready measure of the predominance of sex. His prediction was that if the Vicar of Bray was right and snails needed sex to adjust to changes, he would find more males in streams than in lakes because streams are changeable habitats; if the tangled bank was right and competition between snails was the cause of sex, he would find more males in lakes than in streams because lakes are stable, crowded habitats; if the Red Queen was right, he would find more males where there were more parasites.

There were more males in lakes. About twelve per cent of snails in the average lake are male, compared to two per cent in the average stream. So the Vicar of Bray is ruled out. But there are also more parasites in lakes, so the Red Queen is not ruled out. Indeed, the closer he looked the more promising the Red Queen seemed to be. There were no highly sexual populations without parasites.

Sex keeps the parasite guessing. In Chile, where introduced European bramble plants became a pest, rust fungus was introduced to control them: it worked against an asexual species of bramble and failed against a sexual species. And when mixtures of different varieties of barley or wheat do better than pure crops of one variety (as they do), roughly two-thirds of the advantage can be accounted for by the fact that mildew spreads less easily through the mixture than through a pure crop.

### The Riddle of the Rotifer

Sex is about disease. It is used to combat the threat from parasites. Organisms need sex to keep their genes one step ahead of their parasites. Men are not redundant after all; they are woman’s insurance policy against her children being wiped out by influenza and smallpox (if that is a consolation). Women add sperm to their eggs because if they did not, the resulting babies would be identically vulnerable to the first parasite that picked their genetic locks.

Yet before men begin to celebrate their new role, before the fireside drum-beating sessions incorporate songs about pathogens, let them tremble before a new threat to the purpose of their existence. Let them consider the fungus. For many fungi are sexual, but they do not have males. They have tens of thousands of different sexes, all physically identical, all capable of mating on equal terms, but all incapable of mating with themselves.71 Even among animals, there are many, like the earthworm, that are hermaphrodites. To be sexual does not necessarily imply the need for sexes, let alone for just two sexes, let alone for two sexes as different as men and women. Indeed, at first sight, the most foolish system of all is two sexes, because it means that fully fifty per cent of the people you meet are incompatible as breeding partners. If we were hermaphrodites, everybody would be a potential partner. If we had ten thousand sexes, like the average toadstool, ninety-nine per cent of those you met would be potential partners. If we had three sexes, two-thirds would be available. It turns out that the Red Queen’s solution to the problem of why people are sexual is only the beginning of a long story.

